from birth to death and bench to clinic

THE HASTINGS CENTER

Bioethics Briefing Book
for Journalists, Policymakers, and Campaigns

Chapter 1

Abortion
Bonnie Steinbock, “Abortion,” in From Birth to Death and Bench to Clinic:
The Hastings Center Bioethics Briefing Book for Journalists, Policymakers,
and Campaigns, ed. Mary Crowley (Garrison, NY: The Hastings Center,
2008), 1-4.

©2008, The Hastings Center
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any from or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without
the prior written permission from the publisher, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review.
We have attempted to provide complete and accurate information regarding the individuals, organizations,
and agencies described in this book. However, we assume no liability for errors, omissions, or damages
arising from the use of this Briefing Book.

abortion

1

Ethical Considerations
Public opinion on abortion falls into three camps—conservative, liberal, and moderate (or gradualist)—each of which draws
on both science and ethical thinking.
Conservative. Conservatives regard the fetus as a human
being, with the same rights as any human being who has been
born, from implantation (when a pregnancy begins) onward.
Some conservative groups—such as the Catholic Church—consider the fetus to be a human being with full moral rights even earlier, from conception onward.
Conception is regarded as the significant point because that is
when the embryo develops its own unique genetic code, distinct
from that of its mother or father, and thus from the egg or sperm.
(This belief leads the Catholic Church to oppose some forms of
contraception, such as the IUD and the “morning-after” pill, since
they cause the death of the embryo by preventing implantation,
Bonnie Steinbock, PhD, a Hastings Center Fellow, is professor of philosophy
at The University at Albany/State University of New York.

n The central ethical question in the abortion
debate is over the moral status of the
embryo and fetus.
n Opinions range from the belief that the
fetus is a human being with full moral status and rights from conception to the belief
that a fetus has no rights, even if it is
human in a biological sense. Most
Americans’ beliefs fall somewhere in the
middle.
n Moral philosophers from various perspectives provide nuanced examinations of the
abortion question that go beyond the standard political breakdowns.
n In 1973 in Roe v. Wade, the United States
Supreme Court based its finding of a
woman’s constitutional right to have an
abortion up until viability on two factors: the
legal status of the fetus and the woman’s
right to privacy.
n In 2007, the Supreme Court upheld a law
signed by President Bush in 2003 that
opposes a form of abortion called intact
dilation and extraction, or “partial-birth
abortion.” The law includes no health
exception.

C ONTACT

Abortion has been the subject of much ethical thought from
both pro-life and pro-choice perspectives. The central philosophical question concerns the moral status of the embryo and fetus.
If the fetus is a person, with the same right to life as any human
being who has been born, it would seem that very few, if any,
abortions could be justified, because is not morally permissible to
kill children because they are unwanted or illegitimate or disabled. However, the morality of abortion is not necessarily settled
so straightforwardly. Even if one accepts the argument that the
fetus is a person, it does not automatically follow that it has a
right to the use of the pregnant woman’s body. Without that
right, As Judith Thomson has argued, abortion could be justified.

n Abortion was legalized in 1973, but the
topic remains controversial.

TO

Despite the legalization of abortion in 1973, the topic continues to be controversial and divisive in American politics. While
the right to have an abortion has remained settled since then, the
issue was again before the Supreme Court in 2007. The Court
upheld a 2003 law banning a form of abortion called intact dilation and extraction, or “partial-birth abortion.” At one end of the
debate over this practice are those who regard abortion as murder—a despicable and heinous crime. At the other end are those
who regard any attempt to restrict abortion as a violation of
women’s rights to privacy and bodily self-determination. Most
Americans are somewhere in the middle.

HIGHLIGHTS

E XPERTS

Framing the Issue

abortion

by Bonnie Steinbock

Bonnie Steinbock, PhD, Professor of
Philosophy, The University at Albany/State
University of New York •
steinbock@albany.edu, 518-442-4262
Daniel Callahan, PhD, Co-founder and
President Emeritus, The Hastings Center •
callahand@thehastingscenter.org, 845-4244040, x226
Sidney Callahan, PhD, Distinguished
Scholar, The Hastings Center •
siddan@bestweb.net, 914-591-5647
Thomas H. Murray, PhD, President, The
Hastings Center • murrayt@
thehastingscenter.org, 845-424-4040, x 201

A B O rT I O n

1

F E TA L D E V E L O P M E N T: A T I M E L I N E
The physiological development of the embryo and fetus during gestation does not alone determine the morality of
abortion, but it is relevant to the argument over the moral status of the fetus. Gestation in humans has duration of
about 266 days.

0–22 hours

The first stage is conception or fertilization, a process that lasts about 22 hours and ends with
syngamy, the merging of the parental chromosomes. Syngamy results in a single-celled
zygote, which begins rapidly dividing. As many as 50% of conceptions end in early miscarriage.

6–13 days

The process of implantation begins on approximately the sixth day following fertilization and
takes about a week. Once the embryo is implanted in the uterus, the pregnancy can be detected
and is considered clinical. As implantation completes, the embryo develops a primitive streak,
which is the precursor of the spinal cord and the nervous system. At the same time, the cells differentiate and become different kinds of tissue. This is known as gastrulation. Once implantation is completed, twinning—the division of the embryo into two or more genetically identical
embryos—cannot occur.

12–16 weeks

Between 12 and 16 weeks, the fetus begins to look recognizably human. (Before then, it would
be difficult to distinguish a human fetus from any other mammalian fetus.) Fetal movements,
known as quickening, are felt by the mother early in the second trimester. By the end of the
second trimester, the fetus may suck its thumb.

24–28 weeks

The fetus becomes viable, or capable of surviving outside the womb, in the third trimester,
between 24 and 28 weeks. With a neonatal intensive care unit, a fetus of 28 weeks gestation
age has about an 85% chance of survival. A 24-week-old fetus has only a 10% chance of survival. Even if a premature fetus survives, it is at risk for serious medical problems and lasting
disability.

An issue that remains controversial is at what point the fetus becomes sentient, or capable of experiencing pain or
other sensations. Clearly, sentience is impossible before the beginning of brain function, detected by the appearance
of brain waves between eight and 10 weeks. However, brain waves alone are not enough to determine sentience. In
addition to a functioning brain, the neural pathways have to be developed enough to transmit pain messages to the
brain. researchers believe that this occurs sometime during the second trimester. Some researchers think that sentience may occur as early as 17 weeks gestation; others think it doesn’t occur until between 20 and 24 weeks. But
certainly by the third trimester, the fetus is very likely sentient and probably can hear. In virtually all respects except
location, fetuses at the end of the third trimester are just like born babies.

even before clinical pregnancy has occurred.) The
fetus changes dramatically during gestation but, on
the conservative view, no stage is ever reached at
which we can say, now we have a human being,
whereas a day or a week or a month earlier we did
not. Any attempt to place the onset of humanity at
a particular moment—whether it be when brain
waves appear, or the human form becomes distinct,
or at quickening, sentience, or viability—is bound
to be arbitrary because all of these stages will occur
if the fetus is allowed to grow and develop.
A more recent antiabortion argument by Don
Marquis in 1989 differs from the traditional conservative view in that it is not based on the fetus’s
being human, nor even based on species membership. Rather, Marquis argues that abortion is wrong
for the same reason that killing anyone is wrong—
namely, that killing deprives its victim of a valuable future, what he calls “a future like ours.” This
raises two questions about what it is to have a

2

THE HASTInGS CEnTEr BIOETHICS BrIEFInG BOOk

future like ours. First, what precisely is involved in
this notion? Does it essentially belong to rational,
future-oriented, plan-making beings? If so, then
killing most nonhuman animals would not be
wrong, but neither would killing those who are
severely developmentally disabled. Second, at what
point does the life of a being with a future like ours
start? If the important notion is the loss of one’s
future, at what point is there an identifiable victim?
Here the biology of gestation becomes important.
After conception but prior to implantation, the
embryo can still split into two (or more) distinct
individuals. This makes it impossible to connect
the loss of a future to any particular “victim” prior
to implantation. This may seem irrelevant since
prior to implantation, there is no clinical pregnancy, and, therefore, no possibility of abortion.
However, its relevance becomes apparent when
one realizes that some forms of contraception (like
the IUD and the “morning-after” pill) cause the

Liberal. Most liberals acknowledge that the
fetus is human in a biological sense, but deny that
this endows the fetus with full moral status or a
right to life. In 1971, Judith Thomson gave a completely different pro-choice argument, claiming that
even if the personhood of the fetus were granted,
this would not settle the morality of abortion
because the fetus’s right to life does not necessarily
give it a right to use the pregnant woman’s body.
No one, Thomson says, has the right to use your
body unless you give him permission—not even if
he needs it for life itself. At least in the case of
rape, the pregnant woman has not given the fetus
the right to use her body. (Thus, Thomson’s argument, somewhat ironically for an article entitled “A
Defense of Abortion,” provides those who are generally anti-choice with a rationale for making an
exception in the case of rape, as do many pro-lifers—though not the Catholic Church.) Thomson
maintains that whether a woman ought to allow a
fetus to remain in her body is a separate question
from whether the fetus is a person with a right to
life, and depends instead on the amount of sacrifice or burden it imposes on her.
More recently, in 2003, Margaret Little argued
that while abortion is not murder, neither is it necessarily moral. A pregnant woman and her fetus
are not strangers; she is biologically its mother.
However, she may have conflicts of duties. For
example, a woman’s relationship to her children
who have been born goes beyond mere biological
connection and imposes stronger obligations. For
this reason, their interests may trump those of the
fetus. At the same time, even if the fetus is not a
person, it is a “burgeoning human life,” and as such
is worthy of respect. Many women believe that
bringing a child into the world when they are not
able to nurture it would be disrespectful of human
life. The main reason women choose abortion,
according to Little, is that they think it would be
wrong to have a child when they are not capable of
being good mothers.
Moderate. The moderate, or gradualist, agrees
with the liberal that a one-celled zygote is not a
human person, but agrees with the conservative
that the late-gestation fetus is virtually identical to
a born infant. Thus, the moderate thinks that early
abortions are morally better than late ones and that

the reasons for having one should be stronger as
the pregnancy progresses. A reason that might justify an early abortion, such as not wanting to
become a mother, would not justify an abortion in
the seventh month to the moderate.

The Legal Perspective
In 1973 in Roe v. Wade, the United States
Supreme Court based its finding of a woman’s constitutional right to have an abortion up until viability on two factors: the legal status of the fetus and
the woman’s right to privacy. Concluding that outside of abortion law, the unborn had never been
treated as full legal persons, the Court then looked
to see if there were any state interests compelling
enough to override a woman’s right to make this
personal decision for herself. It decided that there
were none until the fetus became viable, somewhere between 24 and 28 weeks. At viability, the
state’s interest in protecting potential life trumps
the woman’s right to privacy, and at that point
states may prohibit abortion altogether if they
choose, unless continuing the pregnancy would
threaten the woman’s life or health.

1
abortion

death of the embryo by preventing implantation.
On the “future like ours” account, emergency contraception is permissible, which contrasts with the
view of the Catholic Church.

While the right to abortion has remained settled
since Roe v. Wade, the right-to-life movement has
recently focused on a particular abortion technique
known to doctors as “intact dilation and extraction”
and to the general public as “partial-birth abortion.”
In 2003, President Bush signed into law a bill that
banned the technique, describing it as a “gruesome,
inhumane” procedure that is “never medically necessary to preserve a woman’s health,” in which a
fetus is partially delivered alive and a physician
performs “an overt act that the person knows will
kill the partially delivered living fetus.”
The law, which included no health exception,
was found unconstitutional in 2005 but was upheld
by the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of Gonzales
v. Carhart in 2007. In her dissent, Justice Ruth
Bader Ginsburg described the ruling as “alarming,”
and said that it “tolerates, indeed applauds, federal
intervention to ban nationwide a procedure found
necessary and proper in certain cases by the
American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists.” For example, intact dilation and
extraction is safer for the woman—and more likely
to preserve her future fertility—than dilation and
extraction is because dismembering the fetus in
utero might puncture the uterus.
One of the more curious aspects of the law is

A B O rT I O n

3

that it makes no mention of the stage of gestation,
prohibiting only intact dilation and extraction. It
does not prohibit another method, dilation and
extraction, which involves dismembering the fetus
in the uterus, and can also be used beyond the first
trimester. If the issue is how gruesome or inhumane the abortion is, drawing an ethical distinction
between intact dilation and extraction and dilation
and extraction in utero is puzzling. Moreover,
many believe that the question of whether a particular procedure is medically indicated belongs to
the woman’s doctors, and not to the Congress of
the United States. Opponents of the law argue that
it could threaten some second-trimester abortions
and that it is an attempt to intimidate doctors who
perform abortions.

RESOURCES
Web sites
• www.acog.org – the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. The site’s Health Care for Underserved
Women department contains a resource guide on abortion
that includes statistics, research, and medical practice
guidelines.
• www.bbc.co.uk/ethics – the British Broadcasting
Corporation’s ethics homepage contains a page on the
abortion debate that includes articles on legal issues, medical topics, fetal and parent rights, philosophical and ethical
concerns, and religious views.
Recent news
• kari Lydersen, “Antiabortion Ballot Initiative Appears Likely,”
Washington Post, April 2, 2008.
• “Behind the Abortion Decline” (editorial), New York Times,
January 26, 2008.
• rob Stein, “As Abortion rate Drops, Use of rU-486 Is on
rise,” Washington Post, January 22, 2008.
• Stephanie Simon, “Changing Abortion’s Pronoun,” Los
Angeles Times, January 7, 2008.
• Celia W. Dugger, “Abortion Complicates Congressional
Debate Over Foreign Aid Bill,” New York Times, December
9, 2007.
Further reading
• Adrienne Asch, “Will We need Abortion in Utopia,” in
Principles of Health Care Ethics, Second Edition, ed. r.E.
Ashcroft, A. Dawson, H. Draper, and J.r. McMillan
(Hoboken, n.J.: Wiley, 2007), 393-400.
• rebecca Dresser, “Protecting Women from Their Abortion
Choices,” Hastings Center Report, november-December
2007.
• ronald Dworkin, “The Court and Abortion: Worse Than You
Think,” New York Review of Books, May 31, 2007.
• Margaret Olivia Little, “The Morality of Abortion,” in
Christopher Wellman and r.G. Frey, eds., A Companion to
Applied Ethics, Blackwell Publishing, 2003.
• Bonnie Steinbock, “Why Most Abortions Are not Wrong,” in
r.B. Edwards and E.E. Bittar, eds., Advances in Bioethics,
Jai Publishing, 1999.
• Don Marquis, “Why Abortion Is Immoral,” Journal of
Philosophy, April 1984.
• Mary Anne Warren, “On the Moral and Legal Status of
Abortion,” The Monist, January 1973.
• Judith Thomson, “A Defense of Abortion,” Philosophy and
Public Affairs, Winter 1971.
See legislation appendix
See online-only campaign appendix at
www.thehastingscenter.org/briefingbook.

4

THE HASTInGS CEnTEr BIOETHICS BrIEFInG BOOk

